Coin CollectingIntroduction (Porm to Coin Collecting For Dummies, 2nd Edition. You may have just discovered coin collecting for the first time and want to find out more. Or perhaps you’ve collected coins for a while and want to take your hobby to the next level. Coin collecting is a hobby you can share with family and friends. It’s relaxing and as expensive or inexpensive as you want it to be. Coin collecting teaches history, geography, observational skills, organizational skills, and analytical tools — all without your thinking about it. If you buy properly, coins can be an excellent place to park your money for a rainy day, and if you buy the right coins and the market improves, you may even be able to make a profit on your collection someday. About This Book The purpose of this book is to turn you into a world-class coin collector in as short a period of time as possible. The chapters are laid out in parts that focus on particular areas of numismatics (the study of coins), including every- thing from getting involved in coin collecting, to deciding what to collect, to protecting yourself and your coins, to grading, buying, and selling coins. This book is designed to appeal to collectors at every level, from beginner to advanced. We’ve written it in everyday English without overloading you with a bunch of coin terms. (However, if you run across a term you don’t under- stand, you can find a great numismatic glossary in the back of the book.) This is not a hardcore coin book. Instead, this book is a great general reference that points you in different directions for further investigation. You can always come back to this book to regroup, resupply, and ready yourself for something new. Perhaps the most important goal of this book is to get you excited — and to keep you excited — about coin collecting. Coin collecting has been an important part of our lives for many years and we hope you'll develop a sense of appreciation for the hobby as well. 2 Coin Collecting For Dummies, 2nd Edition No one needs coins, but if you decide to collect them, you certainly need this book. We wish we'd had one like it at the beginning of our collecting careers. Coin collecting can sometimes be a confusing maze of choices sprinkled with little traps along the way. Sure, you can go it alone, but why not make your journey into numismatics a lot easier by picking our brains and learning from the mistakes we’ve made over the past several decades? Coin collecting is a huge, wide-open field. Think of this book as a road map to help you navigate your way. Different issues may become important to you as your collecting evolves, so keep this book handy and refer to it often. Conventions Used in This Book This book is easy to use, and it’s made even more so by the few conventions we employ: Bold: We use bold text to highlight the key parts of bulleted lists (like this one). Italics: We use ifalic text whenever we introduce a new term, and we follow up with the definition of that term nearby (often in parentheses). For an example, check out the definition of numismatics in the preceding section. Y Monofont: We use monofont for all Web addresses and e-mail addresses, so you can easily tell where the address begins and ends. When this book was printed, some Web addresses may have needed to break across two lines of text. If that happened, rest assured that we haven’t put in any extra characters (such as hyphens) to indicate the break. So, when using one of these Web addresses, just type in exactly what you see in this book, pretending as though the line break doesn’t exist. What Vou’re Not to Read You don’t have to read any text preceded by the Technical Stuff icon in order to understand the subject at hand. (For more on icons, see “Icons Used in This Book,” later in this Introduction.) Also, sidebars (text in gray boxes) are asides — they’re interesting but not critical to the text, so if you’re in a hurry, you can skip them. Introduction 3 Foolish Assumptions We don’t make many assumptions about you, but we do assume that at least one of the following statements applies to you: ¥ You've never collected coins, but you’re interested in getting started and you don’t know where to begin. You've collected a few coins here and there, but you want to get serious and take your coin collecting to the next level. You're an advanced coin collector who loves to read every book on coin collecting, just to make sure you haven’t overlooked something critical. Coins schmoins ... you’re a collector of For Dummies books. You own every book in the series, and you’re not about to let this one be the first gap in your collection. How This Book Is Organized This book is divided into six parts that provide you with a concise introduction and overview, involve you in starting your collection, and take you deeper and deeper into the world of numismatics. Each chapter is designed to stand on its own, So you can start reading wherever you choose and jump from chapter to chapter with ease. Part I: Making Heads and Tails out of Coin Collecting Don’t be intimidated by the word numismatics — it’s just a big word for the study of coins, the first stop in coin collecting. In this part, we give you plenty of reasons to fall in love with coin collecting. We also stress the importance of doing your homework before you jump in with both feet, and we steer you into some areas in which you want to become knowledgeable about coins. Finally, we show you how to store coins properly so that you and future gen- erations can enjoy them to their fullest. 4 Coin Collecting For Dummies, 2nd Edition Part Il: Ancient to Present Day: Choosing Coins for Vour Collection Coins have been made for thousands of years by hundreds of different coun- tries, so you have a lot to work with. Where to start? What to collect? This part takes a look at ancient coins, U.S. coins, world coins, and the wild and wooly stuff that will really get your numismatic juices pumping. After you’ve read these chapters, you'll have a good idea of what you want to collect. Part Il]: Focusing on U.S. Coins The United States has a rich and varied numismatic history that includes some of the greatest coins in the world. In this part, we present more than just a peek at most of them. Our goal in these chapters is to present you with choices and then let you decide which ones are for you. Part IV: Buying Coins the Safe Way You buy coins with the money left over after paying all your living expenses, so make those purchases count. That can be difficult because it’s a jungle out there! In this part, we alert you to some of the scams that less-than-reputable dealers use to separate you from your hard-earned money. We discuss the var- ious numismatic price guides that help you value your collection and buy and sell coins. We also introduce you to the bane of coin collecting — counterfeit and altered coins — and show you why not to fear them. Where you buy your coins can be just as important as what coins you buy, so this part presents an in-depth look at working with dealers and buying coins at auction. A coin’s condition (known as its grade) is the single most important factor affecting its value. Learning to grade coins takes time, patience, and practice. In this part, we introduce you to some of the concepts behind grading, explain how to learn to grade coins, and show you how to use third-party grading services to your benefit. Part V: Selling Coins and Minding the Law You can’t take your coins with you when you die. So what’s the best way to sell them before you do? In this part, we present the three main options: Introduction selling your collection by yourself, selling to or through a dealer, and selling at auction. Each method has its pros and cons, all of which are outlined here. We also cover legal issues surrounding coin collecting — everything from using coins as an investment to paying taxes. Part V1: The Part of Tens Our editors said to have fun with this part — so we did! In this part, you meet the ten most valuable U.S. coins (wait until you see the prices), our ten favorite coin designs (what a bevy of beauties), and ten ways to get your kids involved in coin collecting. Icons Used in This Book Throughout this book are handy road signs — called icons — that point you toward valuable advice and away from potential hazards. This icon points out specific coins or types of coins that you may want to add to your collection. This is the type of information you want at your fingertips. Consider marking these pages for quick reference. This icon highlights deeper, more technical information that may come in handy as you pursue coin collecting. Feel free to read or skip these mini lectures! An old hobby that continues to evolve has developed many shortcuts to help its participants have more fun. This icon highlights some of the most impor- tant tips. Heeding the advice next to these icons helps you spend wisely, so you have additional pennies for the stuff you really can use. 5 6 Coin Collecting For Dummies, 2nd Edition Where to Go from Here This book is a reference book, which means you can dip into it when you need a piece of information, and you don’t have to read it from beginning to end. (Of course, if you want to read it from beginning to end, we won’t complain!) If you’re just getting started with coin collecting, Part I is a good place to begin. If you already know the basics and you'd like to start looking at specific coins to add to your collection, Parts II and Ill are for you. If you’re ready to buy or sell, check out Parts IV and V, respectively. And if you’re short on time but still want some fun and useful information, you can’t go wrong with any of the chapters in Part VI. We hope your journey through the world of coin collecting is as much fun as it’s been for us! Part | Making Heads and Tails out of Coin Collecting The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant “T hear that he’s Piccuists and in AVF condition, but he’s also been struck twice and definitely off-center.” In this part... f you’re new to the word numismatics (the study of coins), then you’re new to coin collecting. This part is an important one to get you started on the right foot. In this part, we explain why coin collecting is such a fun and exciting hobby and why millions of people now call themselves coin collectors. We also show you the impor- tance of finding out as much as you can about coin collecting — not just to protect yourself as a consumer, but also to give you a big advantage over other collectors. We save you money right off the bat by showing you how to take advantage of the wholesale pricing that’s available to the smart collector. We also discuss buying strategies and how to plan your collection so that you maximize the money you spend on, well, money! The right strategy saves you time and money and increases your enjoyment of the hobby. Finally, we jump into the nitty-gritty of collecting coins, presenting a number of options for storing your coins so that they remain as beautiful and as valuable as they are today. We also discuss security issues and how best to protect your coins from theft and harm. 